<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Description of Newlang</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<h2 epub:type="title">Description of Newlang</h2>
		<p>A full description of Newlang is as follows.</p>
		<h3>Morphology and Syntax</h3>
		<p>Newlang is full of inflections that permit some freedom in word order but the default structure of Newlang is head final, subject-verb-object. Newlang is an agglutinating language. Genitives follow nouns and the word <em>de</em>, adpositions are called prepositions because they precede their clauses, and nouns must precede their relative clauses. Finally, even though Newlang is head-final, adverbs follow their verbs.</p>
		<blockquote>
			<p>The red bird quickly went to the dog's house.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>would be</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The red bird went quickly to house of the dog.</p>
		</blockquote>
		<hr/>
		<blockquote>
			<p>If you are doing a language sketch, then this may be enough. Proceed with caution.</p>
		</blockquote>
		<h3>Nouns</h3>
		<p>Newlang nouns inflect for number, case, gender, possesion, ...</p>
		<p>Noun cases are: actor, patient, or broker and these functions/cases are identified by adding/changing/removing ...</p>
		<p>Noun numbers are: singular, dual, plural, non-zero, fractional, ...</p>
		<p>Noun genders are: animate, inanimate, fey, ...</p>
		<h3>Adjectives</h3>
		<p>Newlang adjectives (dis)agree with their nouns but only in case and number. They are further inflected for evidence.</p>
		<p>Because of the agreement with their nouns, adjectives can come before or after but they are most often placed before. Adjectives must come before the nouns they modify. If there are multiple adjectives they are placed in order of place, time, and color.</p>
		<p>Adjective numbers are: singular and plural. If the attached noun is dual, the adjective is marked for singular.</p>
		<p>Adjective evidences are: seen and heard.</p>
		<h3>Demonstratives</h3>
		<p>All Newlang demonstratives are deictic and are inflected only for gender.</p>
		<ul>
			<li><p><em>tie</em> means that place (there) and is inherently inanimate.</p></li>
			<li><p><em>tiu</em> means that animate thing.</p></li>
			<li><p><em>tius</em> means that inanimate thing.</p></li>
		</ul>
		<h3>Verbs</h3>
		<p>Newlang verbs conjugate for tense and believability and must (dis)agree with their adverbs. Copulas are formed by using an adjective as the object of the present tense of the verb <em>esti</em>; <em>la birdo estas ruja</em> means "the bird is blue". Negation is handled by replacing all the vowels with <strong>a</strong> so <em>la birdo ne astas ruja</em> means "the bird isn't blue".</p>
		<p>The tenses are: past, present, future, unlikely, by dictate of the gods, ... Past tense is created by adding <strong>t</strong> before the verb.</p>
		<h3>Adverbs</h3>
		<p>Adverbs must follow the verb they modify and are of three types: manner, location, and time.</p>
		<p>Manner adverbs are formed by taking an adjective and inflecting it with a following <strong>e</strong>: <em>mi iris rapide</em> "I went quickly".</p>
		<p>Time adverbs are unique words:</p>
		<ul>
			<li><p><strong>a</strong> means long time ago.</p></li>
		</ul>
		<hr/>
		<blockquote>
			<p>Unless you are doing an Advanced Grammar, the chapter is almost over. A Basic Grammar should skip the next several sections and finish the chapter with the historical notes.</p>
		</blockquote>
		<hr/>
		<h3>Participles</h3>
		<p>Participles come in two basic forms: active, meaning that the subject is doing the verb that the participle is based on; passive, meaning that the subject is having the verb done to them that the participle is based on.</p>
		<p>Both types of participles inflect for tense and number: <em>vid<strong>int</strong>a</em> means "was seeing", ...</p>
		<h3>Coordination</h3>
		<p>Conjunctions are handled by using the preposition: <em>ka</em> means and, ...</p>
		<h3>Relative Clauses</h3>
		<p>A relative clause as the subject//noun is formed by iirect object/indirect object/adposition/possessive</p>
		<h3>Questions</h3>
		<p>Yes/no questions, that expect the answer to be agreement, are formed by taking a statement and changing ...</p>
		<p>Yes/no questions, that expect the answer to be dis-agreement, are formed by taking a statement and ...</p>
		<p>Questions asking for information are formed by taking a statemend and replacing the subject/object with one of the following words: <em>it</em> meaning a place "where", ...</p>
		<h3>Historical Notes</h3>
		<hr/>
		<blockquote>
			<p>Even if you are only making a basic grammar, you should include this section, unless your language is a priori.</p>
		</blockquote>
		<hr/>
		<p>Below is a behind-the-scenes description of the historical processes that gave rise to the current alternations seen in Newlang. In the descriptions below, a segment, word or phrase preceded by an asterisk (*) is a proto-form. A proto-form is an older form that's no longer present in the modern language. The changes are listed in order.</p>
		<ul>
			<li>
				<p><strong>Loss of Schwa:</strong> *ǝ &gt; Ø / \_,G</p>
				<p>The basic schwa was lost next to glides and the glottal stop. These sounds affected a change in the surrounding vowels, resulting in modern i, u, and a, as well as older *ai and *au.</p>
			</li>
			<li><p>...</p></li>
		</ul>
	</body>
</html>
