<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Introduction</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<h2>Introduction</h2>
		<hr/>
		<blockquote>
			<p>This is an introduction to this template rather that Newlang, but you should feel free to make an introduction to Newlang instead.</p>
		</blockquote>
		<hr/>
		<p>Hopfully the prior paragraph is an obvious enough meta-comment in this template. The point of this document is to show how a constructed language could be documented. It tends to have as much as I can put into a section, with comments (like the prior paragraph) about how in-depth your constructed language is.</p>
		<p>If you do a search on <a href="https://conlang.org">conlang.org</a> you will find a list of language levels for paid conlangers. Before we get to actual language creation, we need to talk about the bug-a-boo of what some people think they are asking for when they ask for a constructed language; sadly this is even true in professional and very successful film franchises.</p>
		<h3>Vector Drawings</h3>
		<p>The goal here is to create artwork, for a grand total of somewhere between 25 and 30 glyphs. Generally because what we are doing here is actually creating a different way to write English. The reason we say between 25 and 30 rather than 26 is because we occasionally an additional symbol for /ʃ/ and /θ/ or /ð/ and are perhaps throwing away Q and X.</p>
		<p>In addition to digital vector drawings of each glyph you should also provide one sentence in the created writing system.</p>
		<p>For an idea of how you might document a set of glyphs, check out the chapter called "The Look of Newlang" and the section on "Orthography".</p>
		<h3>Digital Font</h3>
		<p>The goal here is to create a font that allows you to almost type English and look like a different language. It should have between 25 and 30 glyphs, though 26 is much more likely. We occasionally find things like Q or X serving as symbols for /ʃ/ and /θ/ or /ð/ or expect the typist to replace those letters with something more phonomic. Of course, modern fonts allow for quite a bit of freedom in having those additional symbols and occasionally the digits of zero through nine are also expected.</p>
		<p>You should also provide instructions for installing and using the font.</p>
		<p>For an idea of how you might document a font, check out the chapter called "The Look of Newlang" and the sections on "Orthography" and "Typing Newlang".</p>
		<p><br/></p>
		<p>Now onto the <em>real</em> constructed languages.</p>
		<h3>Naming Language</h3>
		<p>A language created to provide a consistent naming structure for people and/or places.</p>
		<p>You should also provide a phonology in addition to about two dozen names.</p>
		<p>In general, neither drawings nor fonts will be made for a naming language. Names tend to be written in a modern othography regardless of the source language of the names. In the real world this gives us things like Onondaga in New York while you find Tulalip in Washington.</p>
		<h3>Conlang Sketch</h3>
		<p>This is something more appropriate for a language used in limited circumstances; like official decrees, magic incantations, or barked orders on a starship.</p>
		<p>You should provide a simplified grammar; we're talking subject-verb-object word order. You will also need to provide a dictionary of about fifty words.</p>
		<p>One thing that may be wanted along with a conlang sketch is a unique way to write it. Making a whole font is probably overkill for a limited language used in limited circumstances. But some digital vector drawings may be wanted along with one sentence fully rendered in images, so be clear.</p>
		<h3>Basic Conlang</h3>
		<p>This is supposed to be enough of a language that you can actually make some dialogue.</p>
		<p>At a minimum this should include: phonology, a basic grammar, five to ten sample sentences translated, and a dictionary of about 150 words.</p>
		<p>This does not necessarily mean a unique writing system. The first question to ask yourself is if you even want a unique writing system for it. Perhaps literacy is low enough that it doesn't make sense, maybe it's a language that lacks prestige.</p>
		<p>If you do want to write it, then you must decide if you want images, which are easier to make but harder to string into sentences; or a font, which is harder to make but easier to string into sentences. Either way be clear about expectations.</p>
		<h3>Advanced Grammar</h3>
		<p>As much as possible, this template has tried to provide what is needed to make an advanced grammar.</p>
		<p>This will include at least: a phonology, a full grammar (questions, multiple clauses, etc.), between 20 and 30 sentences translated and a dictionary of at least 500 words.</p>
		<p>Just like with a basic conlang, this may not necessarily include a writing system. Do you even want a unique writing system for it. Perhaps they haven't invented writing yet, maybe it's considered too sacred to write down.</p>
		<p>If you do want to write it, then you will want to make a font and add a rendering of the 20 to 30 translations using the font but have clarity about the creation or non-creation of a font.</p>
		<h3>What Now?</h3>
		<p>Now that we have explained the different levels, you will find boxes throughout this document just like at the beginning of this chapter that will point out things like this chapter isn't used in a naming language, or this section is only for an advanced grammar.</p>
		<p>In each case I've tried to include a large sample of what can be, so that you can focus on being creative.</p>
		<p><br/></p>
		<p>Enjoy.</p>
	</body>
</html>
