<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Look of Newlang</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<h2 epub:type="title">The Look of Newlang</h2>
		<p>Newlang has a distinctive look as described here.</p>
		<h3>Transcription</h3>
		<p>The symbols listed in the tables of the previous chapter are phonetic symbols. These will be used to <em>transcribe</em> Newlang words, but not to <em>write</em> them. To write them, we utilize a romanization system that should make the pronunciation fairly transparent. That transcription system is listed below:</p>
		<ul>
			<li><p>The following sounds will be written using the same letter as their phonetic symbol: <strong>m</strong>, <strong>n</strong>, <strong>p</strong>, <strong>b</strong>, <strong>t</strong>, <strong>d</strong>, <strong>k</strong>, <strong>g</strong>, <strong>q</strong>, <strong>ts</strong>, <strong>dz</strong>, <strong>f</strong>, <strong>v</strong>, <strong>s</strong>, <strong>z</strong>, <strong>h</strong>, <strong>l</strong>, <strong>w</strong>, <strong>i</strong>, <strong>u</strong>, <strong>e</strong>, <strong>o</strong>, <strong>ǝ</strong>, and <strong>a</strong>.</p></li>
			<li><p>The sounds [tʃ] (kind of like the "ch" in "<u>ch</u>arge") will be spelled <strong>ch</strong>.</p></li>
			<li><p>The sounds [dʒ] (kind of like the "j" in "<u>j</u>ar") will be spelled <strong>j</strong>.</p></li>
			<li><p>The sound [ʝ] (similar to the "z" in "a<u>z</u>ure") will be spelled <strong>zh</strong>.</p></li>
			<li><p>The sound [ɖ] (no English equivalent) will be spelled <strong>d</strong>.</p></li>
			<li><p>The sounds [ɟ] and [ʝ] (kind of like the "j" in "<u>j</u>ar") will be spelled <strong>j</strong>.</p></li>
			<li><p>The sounds [ɣ] and [ʁ] (no English equivalent) will be spelled <strong>gh</strong>.</p></li>
			<li><p>Long vowels will be written with a doubled version of the vowel (so [iː] will be written <strong>ii</strong>).</p></li>
			<li><p><em>Make sure you cover every sound you have identified in the prior chapter.</em></p></li>
		</ul>
		<h3>Romanization</h3>
		<p>This is the romanization system, which will be used to spell Newlang using the Roman alphabet. This is also how to find Newlang words in the Newlang dictionary. The full system is described in detail here:</p>
		<ul>
			<li><p><strong>A</strong>, <strong>a</strong>: Pronounced like the "<u>a</u>" in "f<u>a</u>ther".</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>A</strong>, <strong>a</strong>: Pronounced like the "<u>a</u>" in "f<u>a</u>ther", but held slightly longer.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>B</strong>, <strong>b</strong>: Pronounced like the "<u>b</u>" in "<u>b</u>ad".</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>Ch</strong>, <strong>ch</strong>: Pronounced like the "<u>ch</u>" in "ea<u>ch</u>". Unlike the sound "<u>ch</u>" in English "<u>ch</u>air", there is no discernible puff of air that accompanies this sound. If one holds one's breath while pronouncing the "<u>ch</u>" in English "<u>ch</u>air", one will pronounce this sound correctly.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>G</strong>, <strong>g</strong>: Pronounced like the "<u>g</u>" in "<u>g</u>oat" (never like the "<u>g</u>" in "<u>g</u>enius").</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>H</strong>, <strong>h</strong>: Pronounced like the "<u>h</u>" in "<u>h</u>at". If this letter is preceded by another letter that may imply a different pronounciation a small dot (•) will be placed between the letters to indicate two separate consonants.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>K'</strong>, <strong>k'</strong>: There's no English equivalent to this sound. This is an ejective consonant. In the case of <strong>k'</strong>, it's pronounced just like <strong>k</strong>, but with one's breath held. The result is a little "popping" sound that immediately follows the production of the <strong>k</strong>. You can think of it as a <strong>k</strong> that's followed by a glottal <strong>'</strong> sound. Producing those two sounds in short succession will result in a sound very close to <strong>k'</strong>. Continue to practice and you should be able to get it.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>One Important Note Regarding Double Consonants</strong>: If a digraph (e.g. <strong>kh</strong>, <strong>gh</strong>, etc.) is doubled, only the first letter will be doubled (hence, <strong>kkh</strong> not <strong>khkh</strong>). The consonant is pronounced like a doubled consonant, though, as actual combinations such as <strong>k</strong> followed by <strong>kh</strong> are impossible.</p></li>
			<li><p><em>Make sure you cover every sound you have in the dictionary indexes.</em></p></li>
		</ul>
		<h3>Orthography</h3>
		<hr/>
		<blockquote>
			<p>This section is only included if you are providing either vector images or a font. Otherwise you need to say something along the lines of "Newlang has a unique orthography used to write it but we will continue to use the romanization system as described above for ease and simplicity." or even "Newlang does not have an orthography because ..."</p>
		</blockquote>
		<hr/>
		<p>Newlang has a unique orthography used to write it. The orthography of Newlang consists of an alphabet/abjad/abudiga/syllabary/logogram/mixed system with two/three cases. These two cases are called <em>maiusklo</em> and <em>minusklo</em> but they correspond to our upper case and lower case letters. The upper case is used for names, places, and nouns otherwise the lower case is used.</p>
		<p>Symbols are written left to right and lines move from the top of the page to the bottom. When written right to left the shapes will be mirrored. It is understood to consist of twenty-eight letters (called <em>literoi</em> and which also means ...), though it really consists of twenty-two letters and two diacritical marks added to a small sub-set of the twenty-two letters.</p>
		<p><em>If there are a lot of spelling exceptions, make sure to mention that here.</em></p>
		<ul>
			<li><p><strong>a</strong> is indicated by the upper case symbol <span class="myfont">A</span> or the lower case symbol <span class="myfont">a</span> which sometimes has the alternative form of <em>a</em>.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>b</strong> is indicated by the upper case symbol <span class="myfont">B</span> or the lower case symbol <span class="myfont">b</span>.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>ch</strong> is indicated by the upper case symbol <span class="myfont">Cx</span> or the lower case symbol <span class="myfont">cx</span>.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>dz</strong> is indicated by the digraph <span class="myfont">dz</span>.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>g</strong> is indicated by the upper case symbol <span class="myfont">G</span> or the lower case symbol <em>g</em>, but Newlang has a long tradition of printing which uses the lower case symbol <span class="myfont">g</span> and most native charts will show <span class="myfont">g</span> even most people will write <em>g</em>.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>i</strong> following <strong>a</strong> or <strong>o</strong> (both dipthongs) is indicated by the lower <span class="myfont">j</span>, but in all other cases is indicated by the upper case symbol <span class="myfont">I</span> or the lower case symbol <span class="myfont">i</span>.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>ts</strong> is indicated by the upper case symbol <span class="myfont">C</span> or the lower case symbol <span class="myfont">c</span>.</p></li>
			<li><p><strong>u</strong> following <strong>a</strong>, <strong>e</strong>, <strong>o</strong> (dipthongs) is indicated by the upper case symbol <span class="myfont">Ux</span> or the lower case symbol <span class="myfont">ux</span>, but in all other cases is indicated by the upper case symbol <span class="myfont">U</span> or the lower case symbol <span class="myfont">u</span>.</p></li>
			<li><p><em>This format works well for alphabets and some abjads.</em></p></li>
			<li><p><em>For some abjads as well as some abugidas a consonant and vowel section will probably be needed.</em></p></li>
			<li><p><em>For some abugidas and syllabaries a table will probably be needed.</em></p></li>
			<li><p><em>For logograms and mixed systems, go wild!</em></p></li>
		</ul>
		<p>A basic pronunciation chart would look like:</p>
		<blockquote>
			<table border="">
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">A a</span><br/><strong>a</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">B b</span><br/><strong>b</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">C c</span><br/><strong>ts</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">Cx cx</span><br/><strong>ch</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">D d</span><br/><strong>d</strong></p></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">E e</span><br/><strong>e</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">F f</span><br/><strong>f</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">G g</span><br/><strong>g</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">Gx gx</span><br/><strong>gh</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">H H</span><br/><strong>h</strong></p></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">Hx hx</span><br/><strong>kh</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">I i</span><br/><strong>i</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">J j</span><br/><strong>y</strong> or <strong>i</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">Jx jx</span><br/><strong>zh</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">K k</span><br/><strong>k</strong></p></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">L l</span><br/><strong>l</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">M m</span><br/><strong>m</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">N n</span><br/><strong>n</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">O o</span><br/><strong>o</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">P p</span><br/><strong>p</strong></p></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">R r</span><br/><strong>r</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">S s</span><br/><strong>s</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">Sx Sx</span><br/><strong>sh</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">T t</span><br/><strong>t</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">U u</span><br/><strong>u</strong></p></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">Ux ux</span><br/><strong>u</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">V v</span><br/><strong>v</strong></p></td>
						<td><p style="text-align: center"><span class="large">Z z</span><br/><strong>z</strong></p></td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</blockquote>
		<h3>Typing Newlang</h3>
		<hr/>
		<blockquote>
			<p>In case you are curious, this font happens to be a cut-down and slightly modified <code>FreeSerif.ttf</code>.</p>
		</blockquote>
		<hr/>
		<p>The font file is called <code>NewLangRegular.otf</code>. Before you can use it, you will need to install it. In almost all modern operating systems, installation consists of double-clicking on the file, seeing a preview of the font, and clicking on a button with the word "Install" on it. Once you have accomplished that, close out of all your word processors and restart them to ensure that they know the font is available. You should now see a font named NewLangRegular.</p>
		<p>The correspondence between the romanization and the sounds of Newlang has influenced the method of typing in this alphabet. The symbol of the left is the symbol typed if you hold the shift key down while pressing that key and the symbol on the right is the symbol typed if you do not hold the shift key down. If we consider the typical qwerty keyboard, then the layout is as follows:</p>
		<blockquote>
			<table border="">
				<tbody style="text-align: center">
					<tr>
						<td><p>Q<br/>&#160;</p></td>
						<td><p>W<br/>&#160;</p></td>
						<td><p>E<br/><span class="myfont">E e</span></p></td>
						<td><p>R<br/><span class="myfont">R r</span></p></td>
						<td><p>T<br/><span class="myfont">T t</span></p></td>
						<td><p>Y<br/>&#160;</p></td>
						<td><p>U<br/><span class="myfont">U u</span></p></td>
						<td><p>I<br/><span class="myfont">I i</span></p></td>
						<td><p>O<br/><span class="myfont">O o</span></p></td>
						<td><p>P<br/><span class="myfont">P p</span></p></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><p>A<br/><span class="myfont">A a</span></p></td>
						<td><p>S<br/><span class="myfont">S s</span></p></td>
						<td><p>D<br/><span class="myfont">D d</span></p></td>
						<td><p>F<br/><span class="myfont">F f</span></p></td>
						<td><p>G<br/><span class="myfont">G g</span></p></td>
						<td><p>H<br/><span class="myfont">H h</span></p></td>
						<td><p>J<br/><span class="myfont">J j</span></p></td>
						<td><p>K<br/><span class="myfont">K k</span></p></td>
						<td><p>L<br/><span class="myfont">L l</span></p></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td><p>Z<br/><span class="myfont">Z z</span></p></td>
						<td><p>X<br/>^</p></td>
						<td><p>C<br/><span class="myfont">C c</span></p></td>
						<td><p>V<br/><span class="myfont">V v</span></p></td>
						<td><p>B<br/><span class="myfont">B b</span></p></td>
						<td><p>N<br/><span class="myfont">N n</span></p></td>
						<td><p>M<br/><span class="myfont">M m</span></p></td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</blockquote>
		<p>The lowercase <strong>x</strong> key is used to add a compatible accent the the base character. Uppercase <strong>X</strong> will not work. If you want to see either a <span class="myfont">Cx</span> or a <span class="myfont">Ux</span> you need to type <code>Cx</code> or <code>Ux</code>.</p>
		<p>Many spellings are based on historic pronunciations or borrowings and will not follow the general rules. The dictionary will show the current spelling, the way to type it using this font, and the modern pronounciation.</p>
	</body>
</html>
